Hi friends
In this video we are going to learn about the switch statement
So the switch statement is a multi way branch statement and
it can be used as an alternative for a long
if else statement here we check the value of a
variable and corresponding case will get executed
Now see the syntax for the switch statement
So here choice is the variable and we can define cases
inside like this
And this variable here must be an integer type
or character type
Other data types like float or string are not allowed
Now let us see how the switch statement works
It will check the cases one by one from the
top
And if any case matches the particular block will get
executed.
So here if choice equal to 1 then case1
will get executed
And if none of them match then the default case
will get executed here
If choice is not equal to one then we check
If it is equal to 2 and if it is
not equal to 2 also then the default case will
get executed.
Now let us see an example programme which implements
a simple calculator using switch case statement. So first we
are declaring 3 integer variables num1, num2 and
choice.
Then we are asking the user to enter the numbers
or the operands
So let the numbers entered by the user be
10 and 20 and it is stored to num1
and num2 respectively
Now we print a menu and ask the user to
enter a choice
So if the user press 1 we need to
perform Addition. If the user press 2 we need to
perform subtraction.
If the user press 3, we need to perform multiplication
And if the user press 4, we need to perform
division and suppose user enters 3 and it is stored to
variable choice
Now the switch statement will work and the variable choice
will be compared with each case value case one is
not matched
So which case2  it is also not matching
So we go on and check case3 Now we have
a match so the statements in case 3 will get
executed. So 10 x 20 will be calculated and
printed.
Next we have a break so it will terminate the
switch statement
Now suppose user entered 7 and it is stored in choice
So when switch get executed case1 is not matching
case2
is not matching case3
is also not matching and even case4 is not a
match
So the default case will get executed and it will
print "Enter a valid choice"
So if there is no match, the default case will
be executed.
Now let us discuss about the need for break in
switch statement
Let us take the same programme without break statements
So suppose user enters 2 as the choice So when
switch gets executed first it will check case one there is
No match
So it will check case 2 which is matching
So the statements in case 2 will get executed so
num2 is subtracted from num1 and the difference
will be printed And along with that all the following
cases will also get executed.
So the break statement is used to terminate the switch
case execution
If we don't use break statement and if a case
matches then the statements following that case will execute until
a break statement is reached
This is also called fall through in the switch case
Now let us discuss some benefits of the fall through
feature
Let's take the classic example
You must be familiar with this question are issue you
want to delete then press
'y' or 'Y' or 'n' or 'N'
here we need to execute the same piece of code for
y and Y
and so for n and N
We can achieve this by using the fall through feature
here
If the user enter 'y' or 'Y' the
same piece of code will be executed and if the
user enters 'n' or 'N' this
piece of code will be executed.
And if user enters any other input, then the default
case will be executed.
So that's all and thank you for watching this video